---
title: 'Friends'
date: 2014-05-23 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay

class: post-template
subclass: 'post'
layout: post
current: post
author: jonmholt
navigation: true
---
I'm not a friend_y _person. &nbsp;I'm a friend_ly_&nbsp;person, to be sure, but I'm not very good at the work that is required to maintain and nurture a friendship. &nbsp;And that's why it's all that much more special when &nbsp;I realize that there are people in this world that are much better at it that include me in their circle. &nbsp;I got the best gift the other night...five of my best friends gathered together to hang out and have a few beers. This was a common occurrence BC, in fact three of those there the other night were around for those beers BC, but these days it's pretty rare. &nbsp;I was touched.
<a name="more"></a>
When you think about friends, they are an interesting thing. &nbsp;Some friends you've had since you were tiny, and even though you may not even have much in common anymore, it's hard to leave a relationship with that much history. &nbsp;Some friends you've only had a short time but it feels like you've known them forever. &nbsp;Some, often called acquaintances, are casual friends that you're friendly with (often at work) but you probably wouldn't invite them to go boating in the Shuswaps. &nbsp;Some friends are as close as family. &nbsp;Some family are as close as friends. &nbsp;A real friend is a special thing.

For one of my best friends, friends _are_ family. &nbsp;He lost most of his family early in life and so has had to make his own way in the world since. &nbsp;He is one of those people that in five minutes has befriended everyone from the local pub bartender to the CEOs of major corporations. &nbsp;But it takes a certain genuine effort and a pretty high moral standard to become a true friend, a member of his family. &nbsp;I like to think that I've made the cut, but he'd be the first to tell me that I'm still in my probationary period ;)

When you have the opportunity, hug your friends. &nbsp;We all have a choice about who we spend time with and friends are the ones that value time with us enough to _choose_ us. &nbsp;As I come to realize how much I value my friendships, I realize I have to make a conscious effort to embrace them. &nbsp;This is the year that I work on friend_y._
