---
title: 'Visual Inspiration'
date: 2014-07-11 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay triathlon
layout: post
---
I'm a visual person. I think in pictures, I worry about the presentation as much as the content. I see recipes, songs, equations and conversations as images in my head. So it's not really much of a surprise that visualization helps my training. &nbsp;As we roll into the Ironman race week, I have more time at my disposal (it is taper, after all), and so I tend to spend some of that visualizing the race course, my technique, my future as a triathlete. &nbsp;And it even at this late point, is helping me improve my performance.

<a name="more"></a>My latest journey into visualization started with actually watching a champion of the sport do what she does. &nbsp;I watched Lindsay Corbin's [Lucky 13](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z8JCOsHydPk) series made as part of her run up to the 2013 Ironman World Championships. &nbsp; It was a show real of training, recovery, and sponsors. &nbsp;It showed her techniques for training, for course management and nutrition. &nbsp;It showed, fundamentally, her love for the sport. &nbsp;I love Kona. &nbsp;I love seeing Kona. &nbsp;I dream of watching the championships live. &nbsp;I have a goal of racing there one day. &nbsp;I loved watching someone who has done it many times before go through the same preparations I'm just beginning. But most importantly, I loved watching her just swim, bike and run.

You can pick up all sorts of interesting things watching someone who is incredibly good at what she does. &nbsp;There were extended scenes in the series of just Lindsay swimming, biking and running. &nbsp;Watching her hand position in the water as she began her pull gave me a template that I experimented with this morning in the pool. &nbsp;Watching her spin so fluidly, gave me a model to emulate. &nbsp;But probably the most important, was watching her run. &nbsp;The image of her foot plant and body alignment went with me on my run this morning. I used the mental hook of her high cadence turnover on a treadmill as the template for a complete leg extension, and it probably bought me 30-40s/km.

For someone who aspires to Kona, watching a master at work is phenomenal. &nbsp;And not just for the tidbits I can glean on performance. &nbsp;It is also incredibly inspiring. &nbsp;The desire to be where she is, or at least as close as my body will allow, grows every time I see something like Lucky 13\. &nbsp;The mental image is as inspiring as it is informative and I hope to keep the visual of a journey to Kona running through my mind for the next two weeks. &nbsp;Someday, it won't just be in my mind.
