---
title: 'Family'
date: 2014-05-19 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay

class: post-template
subclass: 'post'
layout: post
current: post
author: jonmholt
navigation: true
---
Family is a fascinating animal. &nbsp;Maybe it's cousins that don't speak, siblings that bicker or friends that have been around too long. &nbsp;Maybe it's folks that know you better than you know yourself, in-laws that accept you as you are no matter what, or friends that you would do anything for. &nbsp;Whatever you believe or experience it is hard to quantify the value of family.
<a name="more"></a>
I spent the weekend with family in a tiny microcosm that I both love and hate. &nbsp;At least once a year all my immediate family and most of my extended family gather together. &nbsp;In that gathering are always a number of friends from across generations that might as well be blood. &nbsp;It's wonderful to spend time with everyone especially as we begin to lose many of the older generation. &nbsp;So much so that the tradition of this gathering has become a cornerstone of the shift from winter to spring. &nbsp;But the very microcosm that allows this to happen functions like a lab petri dish bringing all the salient features of these relationships to the forefront, some good, some not.

Ironically, I choose to spend this time with so many others getting to know myself. &nbsp;You can learn much about what you do unconsciously and what is truly import to you by looking through the eyes of family. &nbsp;But more importantly, you learn the places either in personal space or as a parent that you are not willing to negotiate or compromise. &nbsp;These are the core truths of what makes you, you. &nbsp;I listen to others and myself and begin to understand at a visceral level those things that I'm willing to fight to the end for. &nbsp;It can be very revealing.

So today I thank those I call family, and not all of you are blood. &nbsp;Thank you helping make the person I've become. &nbsp;Thank you for being the mirror that helps me know myself better. &nbsp;Thank you for still being there when life keeps us apart for too long. &nbsp;And most importantly, thank you for being you and for sharing your life with me. 
