---
title: 'Becoming an expert'
date: 2014-08-14 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay
layout: post
---
How do you define an expert? A couple of hundred years ago, an expert was called a Master: a Master Mason, a Master Thatcher, a Master Weaver. &nbsp;They got this designation by spending years apprenticing, as a journeyman finding their place in a guild, and then finally by reaching a level of expertise that was recognized by their peers. &nbsp;A Master had privileges. &nbsp;A Master had prestige. People trusted the opinion of the Master, because their opinion was well informed and well practiced. &nbsp;Their key role, though, was teaching the future masters, their apprentices the tools and techniques of the trade. &nbsp;Today though, we have no guilds. &nbsp;We have no Masters. How do we know who to trust and most importantly, how do we learn the skills we need to succeed?

<a name="more"></a>Lets take for example two very different industries dear to my heart: triathlon coaching and web app development. &nbsp;When I think of a Master in the triathlon world, the first name that comes to mind is Joe Friel. &nbsp;He is a triathlete, a coach and an author. &nbsp;His coaching programs and his performance measuring app, TrainingPeaks, are the gold standard of the industry. &nbsp;At least the amateur industry. &nbsp;His programs got me to Ironman Finisher twice. &nbsp;They're the classic plans of periodization, with high intensity workouts mixed with long endurance workouts in a ratio best suited for your distance. &nbsp;Many would call Joe a Master. &nbsp;Ben Greenfield is another internet personality that sells triathlon coaching programs. His training programs are very different, apparently based on advances in training science. &nbsp;Many of his ideas align well with those of Mr. Friel but many would be considered heretical. &nbsp;And his sales methods often have him labelled a snake oil salesman. &nbsp;From that description, one would certainly not call him a Master, but one wonders if perhaps the Mason cast from his guild for suggesting the flying buttress was thought of the same way.

Web app development is similar. &nbsp;There aren't many that one could consider a Master, partly because the technology changes so fast it's impossible to develop the longevity required. &nbsp;But there are a few which have come to be recognized as experts. &nbsp;Take [John Resig](http://ejohn.org/about/) as a master of JavaScript. Take [Scott Hanselman](http://www.hanselman.com/) as a master of .Net technologies (among other things). &nbsp;Take [Eric Meyer](http://meyerweb.com/) a pioneer and master of CSS. &nbsp;Or [David Heinemeier Hansson](http://david.heinemeierhansson.com/)&nbsp;as a master of RoR. All of these people are opinionated, prolific and talented individuals who have done their life's work defining the modern internet. &nbsp;And they teach. &nbsp;All of them. &nbsp;And all of these folks have proposed or taught things that before they came along would be considered heretical. &nbsp;They fit the bill for a Master of old, but again, with no certifying body, it is difficult to know who is and who isn't a Master. &nbsp;There are many many other snake oil salesmen on the internet and it is easy to get lost. 

It seems that today expertise is a much more personal thing. We need to find someone who has more knowledge than we do, that we can learn to like and trust. We need to start a conversation with that person where both benefit. &nbsp;We need to grow the knowledge base together. &nbsp;In this respect I love the approach that the team at [Ghost](http://blog.ghost.org/) is taking with the development of their JS based blogging platform. They are open. &nbsp;They are having conversations. &nbsp;They are learning and teaching at the same time. &nbsp;If I had to pick my candidate for the next Master for my list, I think I'd pick [Hannah Wolfe](http://blog.ghost.org/author/hannah/). &nbsp;Check her and the team out. &nbsp;I think you'll like what you see.
