---
title: 'The Beautiful Game'
date: 2014-06-12 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay
layout: post
---
In honour of the first day of the World Cup, I thought I would spend some time thinking about _The Beautiful Game_. &nbsp;I listened to a long conversation today about soccer in Canada and why it is that professional _football_&nbsp;has never taken a hold of the Canadian or American imaginations. As a parent of a soccer playing nut, it is easy to see why so many people play the game as kids: its great socialization, exercise and, above all, a lot of fun. &nbsp;But when the pros play here, I don't know anyone that goes. &nbsp;In Europe, it seems, kids are out watching their local side by the age of 2\. days. &nbsp;Here, soccer is an after thought when it comes to entertainment. &nbsp;And I think it has a lot to do with geography.

<a name="more"></a>When you think about European countries with strong soccer cultures, you don't generally think of wide open spaces. &nbsp;Lets use as an example England (not the whole of the UK, just England). &nbsp; In a land area about 20% of _Alberta (_131,395 km² compared to 661,848 km²), England has 92 professional clubs and an estimated 7000 non-league clubs. &nbsp;Just by accident you'd be guaranteed to see more soccer there than you could here by going out of your way. &nbsp;But proximity doesn't necessarily breed loyalty. &nbsp;When people live so close together they need to find ways of developing an identity. &nbsp;Neighbourhoods become incredibly important, not to mention any other regional breakdown. &nbsp;The local side, I think, becomes a bit of an identity for the community. &nbsp;But in Europe, other soccer playing Nations are so close that even without the local loyalty, finding a game that could trigger your _national_ pride probably isn't that hard either.
When I saw John Herdman speak last year, his passion and loyalty for his team was addictive.  I was convinced then and there that I was taking everyone I knew to see the Canadian women play.  But the distance of time and space muted that and I missed the one game they played in Edmonton 4 months later.  In a place where no one else is going, where you see them play, at most, once a year, even nationalistic pride couldn't get me out to the pitch.  But there was a quote I heard today that leads me to believe that it might be more than just geography:> There is a language to soccer around the world. &nbsp;In Canada, I fear we've been too well off for too long to speak that language.Much of the world's soccer crazy population does not live an affluent life. &nbsp;Without a job that feeds your soul, I think many of those fans will be missing a strong personal identity. Commitment and loyalty to your team could give you a purpose when nothing else does. &nbsp;In Canada, with the richest middle class in the world, perhaps we just don't need that for our sense of self.

I love to watch soccer. &nbsp;Now that my daughter has decided to play, I even love to watch 6 year olds play. &nbsp;But at the end of the day, I don't have a deep and unabiding love for any sports team. And I can't see many Canadians developing a loyalty to the Canadian professional teams when for most Canadians, they play half a world away. &nbsp;Thankfully, without that loyalty, I can watch the World Cup and not lament that my country's team is missing. &nbsp;Instead I can just enjoy the Beautiful Game.
