---
title: 'The sense of wise'
date: 2014-06-10 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay
layout: post
---
Have you ever thought about your senses? &nbsp;How many do you have? &nbsp;Here, the answer is usually 5\. &nbsp;But apparently that's cultural. &nbsp;There are many places in the world that don't have the concept of the canonical 5 senses: sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. &nbsp;We in north america have given a cultural predominance to those senses, but is that the end? &nbsp;I've said before that working on a car requires all the sense: you need to hear, you need to smell, you need feel and see (hopefully you're not tasting too much, but sometimes even that has its place). &nbsp;But what about your sense of balance, your sense of acceleration? &nbsp;What about your ability to move in three dimensions to reach an awkward spot without ever being able to see it? &nbsp;I think those are senses too, and so do many others around the world.

<a name="more"></a>It's interesting to think about what in our experience could be called senses. &nbsp;In some cultures, the ability to speak is a sense, since it involves the use of the body constructing our experience of the world. &nbsp;In a culture where the inner senses are paramount and contribute to ones moral character, perhaps our awareness of the way we move our bodies through space could be considered a sense, and so walking irreverently could begin to mould our souls. &nbsp;But here's where it gets interesting for me. &nbsp;We in North American think of the senses as innate abilities. Something we're born with. &nbsp;Speaking, to contrast, is something we learn. &nbsp;In popular parlance, the senses are something we have, not learn. &nbsp;But if in other cultures, it is normal for things like speaking and walking to be described as senses, perhaps senses&nbsp;_are_&nbsp;things that can be learned.

Think about gymnasts and divers who learn to know exactly where they are, falling, in three dimensions. &nbsp;Think about massage therapists who learn to see through their hands. &nbsp;Think about the blind who learn to use other senses to see. &nbsp;What if the gut or intuition is really just a nascent sense? &nbsp;If you really could learn a new sense, what sense would you learn? &nbsp;I think if I had the choice, I'd develop my inner senses more acutely. &nbsp;I'd learn how to sense and move every muscle precisely and consciously. &nbsp;I'd learn how to 'see' even the smallest movements to better interact with world around me. &nbsp;Or maybe I'd learn to sense the emotion of a room of people and then learn to shape that. &nbsp;I think that's what good speakers do when they climb on stage. &nbsp;At a smaller scale, that's what sales people do too. &nbsp;They say that the great leaders have emotional intelligence. &nbsp;That sounds like a sense to me.

Maybe the best part of thinking about our senses is that by opening up the definition we give ourselves permission to encounter more of the world. &nbsp;By finding those innate abilities to see more deeply into ourselves and the world around us we grow as people. &nbsp;Those that have gone on that journey and seem to see more, know more are those we call wise. &nbsp;Perhaps, in our culture where we only recognize 5 sense, the title _wise_&nbsp;is used to acknowledge those that have moved beyond that. &nbsp;Perhaps we should strive not to learn the knowledge of those that are wise, but rather to develop the senses they have nurtured in order to obtain that knowledge. &nbsp;With a greater array of senses to bring to bear, it is only a matter of time before we might seem wise too.
