---
title: 'Gender bias'
date: 2014-06-09 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay
layout: post
---
I spent the most wonderful day yesterday volunteering at the dress rehearsal for my daughter's final ballet performance. &nbsp;I was a runner...taking classes of kids from the assembly area to their dressing room. &nbsp;This is a pretty easy job, once you have the hang of it, so it gave me lots of time to interact with the parents and the kids. &nbsp;But it was one strung out mom that prompts me to write today. &nbsp;You see, she was late. &nbsp;Her daughter's class had already gone to dress. &nbsp;Part of my job was to make sure that stragglers got where they were supposed to go, so I happily got to know the little dancer (and that her father's name was John too). &nbsp;When she was ready, I took her hand to lead her to her studio. &nbsp;It was at this point the mom stopped me, obviously concerned that a man was taking her daughter, and asked "Are you really a volunteer? I've never seen a dad volunteer before."

<a name="more"></a>I carefully showed her my clipboard and name tag and reassured her that I was indeed there to help her daughter, not to whisk her away to some untimely end. &nbsp;To be honest, I can understand her concern, ballet is an extremely female focussed endeavor. &nbsp;I have to be careful to refer to all the dancers as kids or dancers and not girls since there are two or three boys dancing in the show. &nbsp;But it was the fear in her eyes that said so much. &nbsp;I don't know this woman's history so I don't know why, but in what is often quite a close, maternal community, a man was an outsider and not to be trusted. 

As the day wore on, though, and the other parents and volunteers got to know and trust me, I felt welcomed. &nbsp;It helped that I can commiserate about makeup on 4 year olds, how ringlets just never seem to stay where they're supposed to, and how tights are dirt magnets. &nbsp;It also helped that, as a man, I could reassure one mom that her sixteen year old who danced a modern dance with...."sizzle"...that her daughter was beautiful and strong and proud unlike some of the comments she'd heard at the competition. &nbsp;It was truly a wonderful moment when happy little girls, eager for their rehearsal would take my hand and skip down the hall with me as we got them where they needed to go. &nbsp;And most of all, it gave me a chance to see my daughter dance, since work takes me away from her actual performance.

In a world where women are becoming truck drivers and heavy machinery operators and MMA fighters, I have to wonder at a bias that says dads can't be volunteers at a ballet show. &nbsp;I can understand why more dads don't do it; the ballet is not an easy environment to learn as an adult male. &nbsp;But I'm sad that more dads don't make the effort and change the perception that dad's don't belong. &nbsp;I think that the moms discovered the pleasure in a different perspective, and I certainly discovered the pleasure of being immersed in the _Show_. &nbsp;Yesterday I came to realize that gender bias has not gone away, but I think that it's become OK to step through those biases and forge a new path.
