---
title: 'The Starbucks Effect'
date: 2014-06-23 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay
layout: post
---
I met a friend and colleague for coffee today. &nbsp;This is something that I do pretty much weekly. &nbsp;It could probably be more. &nbsp;Every time I go, I see many others discussing all manner of businesses from the comfort of a plush coffee-house chair. &nbsp;It's something that, these days, is normal course and there are more and more people for whom the coffee shop _is_&nbsp;the office. &nbsp;But when did this happen? &nbsp;There was a time, not too long ago, when the only place you might find a cup of coffee and a chair was a corner diner like [Rick and Alice's](http://www.urbanspoon.com/r/131/1432218/restaurant/Southgate/Rick-Alices-Grill-Edmonton). While you could probably get a 7-11 coffee or a Timmy's, the "fast food" ambiance was just not conducive to a business meeting or a day's work. I think, and this is certainly the premise of _Onward_&nbsp;by Howard Schultz, that it was the introduction of Starbucks that made this shift in our daily lives.

<a name="more"></a>Love it or hate it, Starbucks basically invented the concept of the_ third place_. &nbsp; There's home. There's work. &nbsp;There's the third place you go where life happens. &nbsp;Think about the last time you wanted to meet someone to discuss something. &nbsp;Anything. &nbsp;You know, that thing that's not quite lunch worthy. &nbsp;Certainly not a dinner affair. &nbsp;But coffee. &nbsp;My coffee today started by running into this friend on a lonely highway in the midst of a 100km bike ride. &nbsp;Now that's a tough place to catch up. &nbsp;But coffee (or water in his case) was perfect.

While I hope no one I know is living at a coffee shop, it's interesting how, for many, the second place, work, has migrated to the coffee shop too. &nbsp;I've done it. &nbsp;Find your favorite brew, sit next to a convenient wall plug and spend the day working immersed in the soft bustle of other people. Those of us that don't have an _office _to go to often miss the hum that comes from being amidst other humans. &nbsp;The bustle of people and the constant flow of caffeine are a great for getting in the flow. 

Still, I find that my [routines](http://www.twentyfivetwenty.ca/2014/06/the-importance-of-routines.html) are best served by the familiar. &nbsp;Where the Starbucks effect is the most important is in the people. &nbsp;Connecting face to face is still the best way to do business, and for good or ill, the coffee shop is the place to go. &nbsp;Mr. Schultz was inspired by the European lifestyle he encountered in Italy and I truly hope that that culture of getting out, into your community and the third place is still as prevalent today. &nbsp;And whether you subscribe to their socially responsible business practices or not, in a world of likes, follows and pins, Starbucks has given us back ourselves.
