---
title: 'La belle langue'
date: 2014-06-18 00:00:00 
tags: 2-minute-essay
layout: post
---
I grew up with french all around me. &nbsp;An old french town nestled in the Alberta prairies wrapped around a french immersion school with teachers and fellow students from Quebec. &nbsp;I read, wrote and spoke with an easy fluency that carried me far in my travels through Europe. &nbsp;In fact, my love of travel was ignited through a school trip to France when I was 17\. &nbsp;French was as much a part of my life as English was, in those days. &nbsp;But that part of me has withered over the years. &nbsp;Withered, perhaps, but not died and living in the officially and authentically bilingual town of Moncton these last few days has reawakened the french part of my soul. &nbsp;Last night, I even dreamed in french.

<a name="more"></a>Speaking another language is not just a process of translating english thoughts into another language. &nbsp;Many who don't speak another language don't always understand that. &nbsp;When you learn something "as a second language" it is often taught to provide you with the ability to _translate_&nbsp;what you want to say _to_&nbsp;another language, not how to _speak_&nbsp;naturally in that language. To some extent, my definition of fluency is the ability to _think_&nbsp;in that other language. &nbsp;The subconscious level of that is dreaming. &nbsp;When I dream in french, I know that that part of my brain is active and taking hold, at least sometimes, of the thinking part of my brain. &nbsp;Here in Moncton I am listening to native speakers speaking from the heart in their own language and each and every speaker gets easier to understand as my french self recognizes a fellow and wakes just a little bit more. &nbsp;It is with awe that I watch natural bilingual orators who switch seamlessly between the languages as they speak. &nbsp;And it is with giddy pleasure that I follow completely and even begin to see the beauty of the interplay.

Now to be honest, french has not left my life. &nbsp;I still have french speaking friends who, after a few pints, will put up with my stumbling attempts to speak. &nbsp;My kids are learning french in school and require support. &nbsp;And most importantly, we as a family often speak french together to help develop the language. &nbsp;But even the _quartier francaise_&nbsp;you don't hear french spoken so naturally. &nbsp;You don't start every conversation with &lt;&lt;Hello, Bounjours&gt;&gt; as you suss out which language someone would prefer to speak to you in. &nbsp;There is the downside of a preponderance of slashes, dashes and half sentences splattered all over public signage, but to me that is a small price to pay for the beauty that is a bilingual community.

Il me semble que n'importe ou j'irai, je trouvera quelque choses qui me ressouvient d'ou je viens. &nbsp;Ca fait long temp que j'ai parler, écouter, ou meme penser en français. &nbsp;Je veux bien remerciez la ville de Moncton pour la chance et pour sa hospitalité généreux. &nbsp;A tous, bon jours, et ce soir, je vous souhaites une rêve dans une autre langue.
