---
title: 'Is your business slowly killing you?'
date: 2015-08-11 00:00:00 
tags: 
layout: post
---
We all enter into running a business because we're passionate about what we do. But after a few years, growth slows and the daily grind of _getting things done_ begins to wear you down.

_Why?_

Almost universally, this happens because you are stuck working _in_ your business rather than _on_ your business. Even when you do take the time, no matter what you try, nothing really changes and you keep getting sucked back into the daily grind.

**You've tried the usual route:**

1.  **Step 1:** Network at local events trying drum up business.
2.  **Step 2:** Buying some facebook ads trying to optimize traffic to your website.
3.  **Step 3:** Advertising at local trade shows or on bus benches.
4.  **Step 4:** Throw up your hands in frustration because nothing changes.

I have the **Step 5** you need. Step 5 is what will get you results...

The secret is to step back from the _tactics_ and focus on the _strategy_. Focussing on tactics leads to:

*   A constant nagging feeling that what you've tried hasn't worked
*   In-fighting between partners because neither sees progress and each feels like they need to take control
*   The constant rollercoaster of starting to make progress and then everything falling apart when circumstances change

If this sounds like you and your business, you desperately need a plan that focusses on your company's _strategy_.

1.  **First, I'll do a business review.** I'll talk to all the owners, define each owner's role in the company, analyze your legal structures (shareholders, USAs) and organizational structure, discuss your goals and plans and set a baseline for your current profitability.
2.  **Next, I'll write up a step-by-step document** outlining the gaps between your goals and what you do today, and then detail specific actions you can take to simplify spending decisions, flatten the rollercoaster and get all the partners on the same page. I'll break this down into: governance issues ("how you make decisions"), strategic issues (growth plans and exit strategies) and structural issues (who's doing what in your business and why). All delivered in a beautiful PDF you can do with as you please.
3.  **Finally, you'll have a week** to ask as many questions as you'd like.

I have over ten years of experience working with small companies, my own bootstrapped startups and a $14B business in the financial industry and I have consistently helped them set and achieve their strategic goals. And now I'm sharing that knowledge with you.

**This service is for you if:**

*   You are an owner/major stakeholder of the company.
*   You have been in business 2 or more years.
*   You have 5-15 full or part time employees/contractors (including the owners).
*   You have spent at least $5,000 on trying to improve how your company operates in the past year.

**How do we get started?**

This isn't for everyone or every business and I only work with people who will get real value from the review. If you are interested, please fill in this short survey to see if we're a good fit:

<div><a href="https://jonmholt.typeform.com/to/uQv9ZN"><button>Take the survey now</button></a></div>

If I know I can help, you'll receive a confirmation email with an invitation to schedule a telephone interview. If we're both comfortable with proceeding after the conversation, I'll take payment and confirm dates for the rest of the process.

Many consultants with far less experience charge ten thousand dollars for reports like this, but I like to empower you with knowledge. **Business reviews are currently just $900**. If you want help implementing the recommendations, we can talk.

If you sign up right now, you'll get your review in about 4 weeks. I currently do just two business reviews per month, so space is limited.

Got questions? I'm happy to answer them. [Get in touch now.](mailto:jon@twentyfivetwenty.ca)

<div class="recommendations">
      <blockquote>
        <p>Jon is an exceptional leader. I have worked with, for and above Jon and in all cases he has been a most talented leader. Jon's approach to people, process and tasks is that of a partner; he learns and teaches by example. He recognizes talent and tolerance better than any person I've worked with. Jon's technical ability exceeds his resume and experience through collaboration, creativity and a consistent ability to invent the right solution to the challenge. Its an honor to be working alongside such an ethical and committed leader. <cite>Eunice Hooper</cite></p>
      </blockquote>

      <blockquote>Jon is very insightful in his business acumen especially in the area of IT. His professional experience involves having built and divested multiple companies and dealing with private enterprise and government contracts. It gives him a broad base of experience on which to draw. <cite>Alison Stake</cite></blockquote>
    </div>
  </div>
